>> Evgenii Ray: So
we're going to loop through the whole
pool starting from the first element.
And the first element is item free
because remember we swapped the places.
Now the item free has the first
position in the bowl, and
we're also going to set
up the previous pointer.
The previous pointer will point to
the previous element in the pool.
And in case of the item 3,
where the index is 0,
we are going to use the last
element of the array,
treated as a circular q in this case.
So when the minus 1 will give us
the of the last element, okay?
So how do we calculate
the position of item 3,
because the item 3 is the current one?
So we need to know the y
attribute of the item 2, but
we don't have any y attribute yet,
we don't know the y position.
So we are going to move all our cards
to the separate staking context using
the position absolute so every card
will become absolutely positioned.
And now we're going to
maintain their position on
the screen by applying
this CSS transformation.
And to calculate the position
of the of the card,
we take the previous item, y position,
then we sum the height of this item,
then we sum the margin of this item,
and then apply to item 3.
But the thing is, when we just initialize
our first cycle of virtualization,
we don't have the data y set yet.
So for this exact case,
we initialize it to 0 on the first one,
so our item 3 will be set as 0.
So when we move to the next element and
we move our pointers by 1, so
now the current element is item 4,
and the previous element is item 3.
So what's going to happen now,
we're going to access the y3 position, and
remember, we set it to 0.
So now we know how to calculate the next
y, so we're going to use the y0,
then we're going to access
the height of the item 3 element,
sum it, and plus the margin
between these two elements.
And then we're going to apply the CSS
transformation to the element, so
we move it to the right place.
And the same applies to,
as we cycle for the pool,
we're gonna move our elements
the same way until all elements
are moved and
the y position is initialized, okay?
Once the elements are moved,
our next task will be to
move the observer code here.
So right now the top observer as you can
see in not in the right position, so
the observers should take the following
positions that the top observer
should be right before the item 3.
So we're gonna use the for
the y of the first element in
the pool which is the item 3.
And the bottom observer will
use the position of item 6 plus
the height of item 6 plus the margin.
So there moving down.
So this is the most
complex part of exercise.
So if you guys have any questions,
please ask, and
I'm going to be very slow as
we proceed with the code.
Let's get back to the code now.
>> Evgenii Ray: So let's update
our handle bottom observer code.
Now we need to move our elements.
So we're going to call another
method called updateElementPosition.
And it accepts the direction,
which is the top or down, so
we're gonna handle the down first.
>> Evgenii Ray: So
when we're handling the element position,
let's do exactly what we're described.
So first of all, we need to get the
references for the previous element and
for the current element.
So we're going to look for the pool,
starting from the index 0.
Then we are going to,
>> Evgenii Ray: Access our
pool,
>> Evgenii Ray: Increase
the index in each cycle.
And now we want to access
the previous element and the current.
So for the previous element because
we can't access position minus 1,
we're gonna use the at
function on the pool.
So use pool at, and
when the negative index is provided,
then we kind of look backwards.
So we can provide i -1, so
we use -1 because we need two previous
elements to the current cycle.
So let's change it to let, okay.
Now the current position is just basically
indexing using the current index, okay?
Now we have our previous and
the current and remember the next step,
now we need to check that the previous
element has the y position set.
So that now we need to utilize the y
function that we already have in the code,
so we check the y of the previous element,
and
it checks the data attribute that is set.
If it's not set,
then we know that we need to
initialize the current element with a 0.
So now we set the 0 value to
the to the first element.
If it's not the case,
now we can recalculate the position
of the current element.
So let's create a new
variable called called newY.
And for that, we're gonna use the y
position of the previous element plus
the margin,
we already have the constant for that.
And we use a double margin because the
margin comes from the previous element and
from the current element.
And then we're gonna use the previous
element height, so we need to access
the getBoundingClientRect, and we're
gonna use the height property on that.
>> Evgenii Ray: Okay, now we have the newY
position, we can set it to the element.
So we're gonna use the y function and
we're gonna set the current
element with the newY position.
But this is just a data at tribute,
so nothing is moved yet.
Now we need to move our
element on the page,
and we can do that by
setting the transform style.
So we're gonna utilize the GPU now,
to move the elements around because
the CSS transformation utilized GPU.
And we're gonna move our elements to
the new separate stacking context.
So we use the transform,
>> Evgenii Ray: And then we're gonna
use our function that we already
created and pass the newY, okay?
Now our element will be
moved to the new position,
but there is one thing missing still.
We still need to move our observers.
So let's do that now because
this code will be same for
the top and the bottom observer.
Remember, we need to know the first
element and the last element because
the top observer will take the position
right before the first element.
And the last element will take
the position right after the last element.
So let's access the reference
of the first element and
the last, and
we can just use the pool for that.
So for the first element in the pool,
we access the index 0.
For the last element in the pool,
>> Evgenii Ray: We can use at( -1).
So let's calculate the position
of the top observer.
So the topY will be equals
to the Y(first) element.
This is pretty simple,
but the position of bottom
observer will be equals to
the y of the last element.
Plus margin and plus the height
of the of the last element.
So now we need to move our observers.
So we need to access the top and
bottom observer and
we can use what we already have this line
here, the top observer and the bottom one.
So let's apply the same transformation for
the observer code, so we can copy
this line, so now we have that we need
to update the top transform attribute.
Okay, so now we use the translateY and
use the topY and for
the bottom observer we apply
the same transform and
translateY(bottomY).
Okay, now we can test our code, I think.
So if we go to index html and
then run our code, and
you will see that it's actually
doesn't work as we expected.
This is because the element at the moment
are rendered in the normal flow,
we haven't moved them to
absolute position yet.
So the Browser tries to render
them as a normal flow, and
then we also apply the transformation.
So let's fix that by moving all our
elements to the absolute position,
so we can set the style, card,
position, absolute.
And we can set the container,
>> Evgenii Ray: To
be position relative,
to be the reference point for the card.
And we can also set the width
to 100% just to make sure that
the the current takes 100%.
So if we scroll down, now we see that
everything seems to be rendered fine.
Now we're moving all our top
elements from top to bottom and
if we scroll down,
we see that everything is rendered, and
we can verify that by going,
>> Evgenii Ray: To the developer tools and
see the dorm tree.
Now we have our elements inside and
they positioned according to the data
y attribute, and if we scroll down,
you'll see that we're just
changing the attributes.
The DOM is not modified at all.
So we're basically,
moving the pixels around.
So that's how we implemented
the bottom virtualization.
But one thing is still not
implemented is the top observer.
So top observer is moved
to the right position,
which is the entry 40, but
we still need to handle the callback here.
And this will be the next
part of our exercise.